---
layout: post
title: "More conferencing"
date: 2014-10-27 15:46:11 +0000
comments: true
categories:
published: false
---

I've spent the last week in the UK going to two Cocoa-dev conferences: [⌘R](http://cmdrconf.com) and [NSScotland](http://nsscotland.com). It was the first time I've been to ⌘R (because it was the first edition) and the second time at NSScotland.

To get this out of the way: both were pretty different, but I loved both.

First of all, ⌘R's audience was mostly younger people. It's not like there were no older devs, but the ad hoc age distribution query in [Michael Bay](http://)'s talk on MonoCulture made it clear most of the audience were in the mid-twenties. If he would have done the same at NSScotland, I'd wager most of the audience would be in their mid-thirties. The fun thing is that this really gives I different kind of atmosphere. I don't know how to explain this different audience, but I guess the location might have one thing to do with it. There's a lot of young iOS devs in London, and while I don't know if most of the attendees at ⌘R were 'locals' I can imagine that if you work and live in London going to ⌘R isn't that much of a big step. Also, during his talk, [Peter Steinberger](http://) asked how many in the audience were indies/freelancers. About 10 people raised their hand. So I guess that would back up the notion that most of the people there were young iOS/Mac devs sponsored by the companies they work for. At NSScotland, I would think this figure would be quite different. But like I said: while ⌘R felt more dynamic and faster paced, NSScotland felt more laid back and relaxed. There's also more time for socializing at the latter (not that there was a lack of it at ⌘R either, but it's catered into the format at NSScotland). So that was interesting to see how two (very good) conferences stacked up against each other.

Being at ⌘R was the first time I was a conference without one of my fellow countrymen. All other confs I've been to before featured at least one or more Belgians in the audience which makes it easy to find somebody to talk to. Luckily, I knew a few people that were also at ⌘R (because I've met them at other conferences before). So while I think "socializing" with unknown devs is still hard to do, I find that it becomes easier to do once you get to know more people. Contact through Twitter also helps in this regard because it creates at least a context for both sides to operate in, but it's still different while doing it face to face. In that regard, it was really nice to catch up with [Neil](http://), aka the moustached emoji man. He even let me fondle is brand new iPad Air 2. ;).

The talks at ⌘R were pretty good. A good mix of technical and soft talks. [Mike Lee](http://twitter.com/bmf)'s opening talk was very good, if only because of the food for thought he provided even with the bad news he broke to us all. Right after that I really enjoyed [Daniel Steinberg](http://twitter.com/dimsumthinking) on functions in Swift. It was really well brought, and I can imagine that even if you knew most about functions in Swift it was a pleasure to watch. Speaking of functional Swift: big round of applause for [Chris Eidhof](http://twitter.com/chriseidhof) for doing a live coding session showing us how to do functional Swift (going from a procedural approach to a functional approach).

The location was pretty good. Good wifi (not an easy thing to do at conferences), a good coffee bar next door ([McIntairs](http://)) which provided free espressos or lattes when you flashed your conference badge, but also made good drip coffee for in the conference venue itself. I loved that they had thought of fruit. I was a bit dissappointed there was no cake (read all about it by browsing the [#cakeconfgate](http://) hashtag). The only thing I didn't really like were the chairs at the conference. Maybe it was just me, but my ass hurt after a full day on those chairs. It wasn't really a problem, and maybe I should move around more, still... I dunno. First world problems, I guess.

I thought the level of talks at NSScotland were a bit less this year compared to last year. I can't really put my finger on why or how, but I also want to stress the part that I'm not really bothered by it. I think a large benefit of NSScotland is the social part, where the structure of the conference combined with the "cozy" conference dinner (again some excellent chili from Illegal Jack's who provided us with food even though they had to close up their restaurant do to an accident in their building) really allows you to connect to other people. For example, there's no Q&A after a session, but there's ample time to go talk to the speaker if you do have a question (which is a good thing if you're not too fond on speaking up in public). And due to the half hour in between sessions and
