---
layout: post
title: "NSScotland 2013"
created_at: 2013-10-21 15:27
comments: true
categories:
- iosdev
- conferences
published: false
kind: article
---

NSScotland. Up until last May, I never had heard of it. This tweet changed that:

Having just been to NSConference, already having a ticket for iOSDevUK in my pocket, I thought NSScotland would be the perfect conference to end the "conference season". Not being able to go to WWDC this year, and having a bit of a budget saved up for conferences, the more local european conferences are budget friendly and so there wasn't a good reason not to go. And so I bought a ticket.

<!-- more -->

Well, I haven't regretted it. It was the conference which felt the must fulfilling of all three I did these year. NSConference was great content wise, but the "large" contingent of Belgians present made that "getting to know other people" was difficult (mainly because them Belgians are such a nice bunch to hang out with).

iOSDevUK was better a bit less content-wise. It was while still pretty awesome, but it's clearly noticable that the speakers at NSConference are more experienced than the ones at the smaller conferences (this also reflects onto the ticket price, of course). It was a lot better in regard to getting to know more people. I tried to talk to more "strangers" than I did at NSConference, but it's not easy (although there's plenty of conversation starters at Cocoa-based conference). But, I got to know more people and that made up for the difference in presentation content. Just as I had expected, so iOSDevUK was another great conference. I'm definately going back.

But now NSScotland. While not everybody you meet at another conference is at every other conference, going to three Cocoa conferences in the UK surely helps. The community isn't that big, so the chance of meeting people you already know is pretty high. Talking to "old friends" surely helps in meeting new people too, because they know other people you don't already know about, you start talking and there you go. I know this sounds contradictory with what I said before, but there's a difference with being in a group with people from your home country limiting social contact, and talking to pockets of people you know from other occasions. And so I met a bunch of new people, and met up with a bunch of people I've met before.

The schedule of NSScotland certainly helps in that regard. You start at 10am and go to 5pm, with 6 sessions each day (there are 2 days of NSScotland). Each session takes half an hour and there's an half an hour break in between each session. And lunch, of course. The sessions have no Q&A, since you can use the half hour between each session to go talk to the speaker (or do it later, there's plenty of time). You'd think that half an hour for a session is too short, but I found it to be actually pretty good. For the technical talks there's not enough time to go really technical, but there's enough time to point out enough highlights to get you started. For the non-technical talks, half an hour is pretty sweet in getting a message across where as longer might make the presentation a bit long-winded (this of course depends on the skill of the presenter, as stated before). So yeah, this halfhour-halfhour thing is pretty good.

The half hour inbetween sessions was used to tinker with what I just learned (iBeacons!), to go find a drink or take a toilet break. And mainly: to talk to people. Sometimes tagging along with somebody you know, sometimes to go respond to a tweet in person (hi, @secboffin!), sometimes just find somebody and talk to them. It was pretty easy to start a conversation. Being able to tag along @tmaes who just about knows everybody thanks to his ubitiquous conference going was a great benefit, I might add (although he really is a timid guy, you know).

The sessions I saw were pretty good:
* Daniel Steinberg (@dimsumthinking) talked about being focused. You've always have heard part of these inspirational talks before, but the points he made were good and he hit a homerun with his last slide (how sad it was nevertheless). It put everything into a different perspective, and it's certainly is something I'm going to take along in how I'm going build apps.
* Neil Inglis (@neilinglis) talked about what you can do with UIDocument and NSDocument. I hadn't actually made a document based app before, so the pointers he gave us were interesting. Will definately be going back to this when I need it.
* Matthew Robinson (@mttrb) showed us Bluetooth LE and iBeacon stuff (which I didn't know is still under NDA and unofficial, hardware wise). I knew using it was simple but not that it was that simple. He hid 3 make-shift iBeacons in the conference hall for us to try out. I made a simple app for detecting them, which was done in less than half an hour. So it really *is* simple. No excuses not to use it from that side, in any case.
* Stever Baker (@srbaker) Came all the way from Canada to show use some bits about test-driving Cocoa apps. I found the user acceptance part featuring Frank pretty interesting and will be trying that out in the near future. Great talk.
* Lori Olson (@wndxlori) talked about handling large datasets in Rubymotion. This was technically not very interesting for me since I don't use RubyMotion (although the code onscreen was as a jarring experience as I remembered it from trying it out once), and secondly because I've been through the problems she was talking about and knew of their solutions (although I found her "let's do this on the Mac instead of the phone" approach pretty interesting). So yeah, not much to take away from there, but it was a lovely talk nonetheless.
* James Thomson (@jamesthomson) gave us a summary on his 20^H^H30 year long career (as an indie developer). Being the author of famous apps like Pcalc and Dragthing, this was the perfect kind of talk to end the day. Full of anecdotes, and well presented (even though he was quite nervous about it he told us). Good stuff (the epicness started of with the first slide already):

The next day we got:

* hired black pixel
* core audio
* Virtually Understanding Memory
* accessibilty
* Seeing The Bigger Picture
* secboffin


So yeah: great conference content wise, awesome conference social wise. The Cocoa communities I've come to know the last y
