---
title: "Murica"
created_at: 2015-10-10 21:08:52 -0700
kind: article
categories:
- usa
- life
- work
---

Some observations and highlights of one week in California:

* Given the number of commercials for food on TV, it's no surprise my studio had no actual table (I have one coming in on Monday though).
* Speaking of TV commercials: a 90 minute movie takes 3 hours because for every 10 minutes of movie, there's an accompanying 10 minutes of commercials.
* More on food: there's seem to be enough food chains that you can eat in a different one each day of the month.
* I managed to open a US bank account, because Apple Pay.
* I stopped wearing a sweater after 4 days. The weather's just too gorgeous. 
* Got rid of the jetlag by Friday. I do am dog-tired every night I get home (I barely survived past 10pm this week). This was confirmed when I managed to sleep more than 3 hours during middle of the day on Saturday. 
* Related: I sleep a lot better with the airco on than off (I discovered after 3 nights).
* Driving a car with automatic transmission is awkward at first, but so glorious once you get used to it.
* I'm never going to get used to American food portions. Man.
* No Starbucks yet (yay!), and Philz Coffee is pretty great (yay!).
* They have Seinfeld on TV.
* Did I mention the weather's pretty great out here?
* Bay Area traffic sucks. Luckily my daily commute doesn't suffer from it.
* 2 more shootings happened in the US while I was here. The mind, it bends.
* Bacon. 
* Most people are very nice and welcoming. This is especially true for the people I've met at Apple.
* I don't know of a good Dutch word for "tailgating".
* Finding a good way to pronounce my last name as something comprehensibly for Americans is quite the challenge.
* Most drivers here are pretty disciplined. 
* When talking in myself (this is a healthy trait to have, okay?) I am now doing it in a combination of English and Dutch.
* Why is everyone so crazy about crème brûlée?
* I haven't made it to San Francisco. This Saturday night, I will.
* Shopping in another country is strangely disconcerting. Even if a supermarket is just a supermarket, it's different enough to feel uncomfortable.

And oh... Working at Apple has been great so far. Can't wait for more. 
 







